In this lecture, you'll learn how to configure VLAN trunk ports with a lab demo. So the lab topology now,
we've got SW1, SW2, and SW, and at SW1 and SW3,
we've got both Engineering and Sales clients.
The Engineering PCs are in the 10.10.10.0/24 IP subnet, and in the ENG VLAN, and the
Sales PCs are in the 10.10.20.0/24 IP subnet in the SALES VLAN.
Right now, we're carrying on from the last lab demo.
So I've already configured SW1,
I've put the Engineering PCs and the Sales PC into the correct VLAN.
I haven't configured the trunk port over to SW2 yet, and I haven't configured SW2 or SW3
at all.
So, let's have a look at that.
So I'll go on to SW1,
and if I do a 'show vlan brief', you can see that the correct ports for the PCs are configured to
put them into the correct VLAN.
But the interface that is going across to the other switch of Gig0/1 is not configured yet,
and if I do a 'show interface GigabitEthernet0/1 switchport', you can see it's got the
default configuration from modern switch, where it is currently an access port and it is in VLAN 1.
So, I need to configure that to be a trunk port.
So I'll go to global configuration, and actually, before I configure the interface, I'm going to want
to configure the Native VLAN on here and I don't want to use the default VLAN of 1 because there
are some security issues with that.
So, I'm going to create a dedicated VLAN to be used as the Native VLAN.
I'm not going to have any actual production traffic in this VLAN though, so I will create a VLAN.
I'll use a number that I'm not using elsewhere in production, 199 for example, and you can
name it anything you like.
I will name this Native, to give it a descriptive name. Now, I'm ready to configure my interface.
So I'll go to interface GigabitEthernet0/1 and I'll say 'switchport mode trunk', to configure
it as a trunk port.
Now, if this was an older switch, it would support both ISL and Dot1Q trunking, and ISL was
never used any more.
We always want to use Dot1Q. So to check that, I'll put in the command 'switchport trunk encapsulation dot1q',
and I'm getting an error message now because this is a newer switch.
It only actually supports Dot1Q,
but it didn't do any harm putting that command in to check.
I also need to set the Native VLAN,
so I'll say 'switchport trunk native vlan 199', changing it from the default of 1, and that's
everything I need to do on that port.
I need to configure the other side as well, also to be a trunk.
So that was on SW2, also an interface gig0/1.
So let's go onto SW2, I'll do a 'show vlan brief' on here.
You can see it's a brand new switch.
I haven't configured anything on it yet, so I need to configure my VLANs first.
So I'll go to global configuration and configure VLAN 10, which was named Eng; VLAN 20,
named Sales; and VLAN 199, named Native.
This has to have a consistent configuration with my other switches in the campus.
Then, I configure my interface.
So it was 'interface GigabitEthernet0/1', 'switchport mode trunk',
to set it as a trunkport.
I'm going to use the abbreviated command here.
I just say 'switch mode trunk' to save me typing in the whole word of switchport,
and it's currently set to trunk encapsulation auto, so I need to change this to
'switchport trunk encapsulation dot1q' to set it to Dot1Q trunking first, and then I'll try 'switchport mode trunk',
and it works okay now.
So this is an older switch, this supports Dot1Q and ISL. Before I can configure it as a trunk port, I need
to say 'switchport trunk encapsulation dot1q'. So, that's done. The last thing,
don't forget to also set the Native VLAN, the trunk won't come up properly if you don't do that,
so 'switchport trunk native vlan 199'.
So, that's the trunk configured going over to the left to SW1.
Another thing I could do here, real-world,
you'd want to do this is put a description on here, so I could say 'description Trunk to SW1'.
I also need to do the trunk on the right hand side
going to SW3.
So that's on interface GigEthernet0/2, and I need to say 'switchport trunk encapsulation dot1q',
'switchport mode trunk',
and 'switchport trunk native vlan 199'.
Okay, so that is SW2 configured now. If I do a 'show vlan brief', I can see that all of my VLANs
have been configured,
and if I do a 'show interface gig0/1 switchport', I can see that rather than being the default
of an access port and VLAN 1, this is now administrative mode is trunk.
The operational mode is down right now, because the trunk hasn't come up.
Okay, let's do a
'show ip interface brief' and I can see that
GigabitEthernet0/1 is, for some reason, administratively down.
So, there's a problem there.
So let's go to global config again, and 'interface gig0/1' and do a 'no shutdown',
and that should fix that problem. While we're here,
while we're waiting for our interface to come up properly,
you see we got an error message from CDP saying there's a Native mismatch discovered on gig0/2.
That's on the interface which is facing SW3.
It's because we haven't configured SW3 with the trunk port in the Native VLAN 199 yet.
Once we do that, the error message will go away.
Okay, so let's try the 'show interface switchport' command again for gig0/1,
and now I can see that the operational mode has come up as a trunk, it was down before, so it's a
trunk port and the Native VLAN is 199.
So, that is looking good now.
Lat switch that
we need to configure is SW3.
So let's go on there,
and we need to configure the VLANs again. So I'll go to global configuration, 'vlan 10', 'name Eng',
'vlan 20', 'name Sales', and 'vlan 199', 'name Native'.
So I've created my VLANs,
now I need to configure the trunk port
going back to SW2. That was on interface gig0/2 on SW3, and I will say 'switchport trunk encapsulation dot1q'.
I get an error message because it's a newer switch,
that's no problem. Then 'switchport mode trunk', and 'switchport trunk native vlan 199'.
So that is my trunk port configured, and I see I get
the message, 'Port consistency is restored.' Let's just check that this one isn't shut down,
so I'll do a 'show ip interface brief' and gigEthernet0/2 is up, up, that looks good, and I'll do a 'show interface gigEthernet0/2 switchport',
and I can see that the operational mode is trunk and it's up, that looks good, and the Native VLAN is 199.
So, I'm trunking all the way end-to-end across my switches now.
The last thing I need to do is configure my access ports for my PCs on SW3.
So let's have a look at the topology and see which ports are which,
so fastEthernet0/1 and fastEthernet0/2 are for the SALES VLAN and fastEthernet0/3 is for ENG VLAN.
So, let's configure that.
That was on SW3, back to global configuration, and I'll do interface range so I can configure
both of the Sales ports at the same time. So 'interface range fastEthernet0/1 - 2',
'switchport mode access', and 'switchport access vlan 20' was for Sales, and then 'interface fastEthernet0/3',
again, 'switchport mode access', and this one is 'switchport access vlan 10' for my Engineering
PC, and that's it. That's the configuration completed.
Last thing I need to do is check that it actually works and that we've got connectivity.
Let me just do some verification on the switch
first, so I'll do a 'show vlan brief' and I can see that my VLANs are created and the correct ports are
in the correct VLANs.
I already checked the trunk port going back to SW2, so that all
looks good.
So next, I'll go onto one of my PCs.
I'll go onto the ENG1 PC. I will ping ENG2, which is on the same switch.
So I don't need my trunks to be working for this, that's at 10.10.10.11,
and that is working okay.
Okay, the moment of truth.
Let's try pinging 10.10.10.12. If we look at the topology diagram
again, so I'm pinging from ENG1, which is connected to SW1, over to ENG3 at 10.10.10.12,
which is on SW3.
So, we need to have end-to-end connectivity now. So let's try the ping, and great,
the ping worked.
So that is all good.
I'll also check that the Sales VLAN is working, so I'll go on to SALES1. Actually, just before I go
onto SALES1, let's have a look at the topology diagram again.
So SALES1 is connected to SW3,
I'm going to ping across to SALES3 on SW1.
So I need to ping 10.10.20.12, so 'ping 10.10.20.12',
and that's all good as well.
If I look back at the topology diagram again,
notice
that I don't have a router here, so I'm not going to be able to ping between my different VLANs, between
my different IP subnets. To be able to do that,
I would need a router. Just to prove it to you that, you know, this isn't going to work anyway,
so from ENG1, if I tried to ping a Sales PC, let's ping 10.10.20.11,
this is going to fail because there's no router there.
We're going to have a look in a later lecture in this section about how we do allow for inter-VLAN
routing.
Okay, see you in the next lecture.